Bracing is the act of contracting your abdominal muscles or "core" before you are about to engage in an act that threatens your "postural integrity". The latter, for a given range of motion is your ability to maintain proper posture throughout, as you go from one position to the next. The same is of utmost importance in order to stay injury free and avoid learning incorrect movement patterns. 

A side benefit of bracing is the fact that there is an efficient force transfer from the source (muscle or muscle groups) to the target (muscle or object). So in boxing, a superior "cross" punch is one that involves not only the strong "backing" of lower body but an inpenetrable brace that efficiently transfers the force through the torso, the shoulder, the arms, the fist and finally to the oponent. Similarly, the efficiency of a Jerk in weightlifting would be directly impacted by how much of the lower body force is "available" at the clavicle/shoulders to be transferred to the heavy/dead weight of the barbell and the plates!

When it comes to strength training or olympic lifting, before a lifter even thinks of adding weight to the bar, (s)he should at the *bare minimum* :

Step:1 Have sufficient control of key muscle groups.
Step:2 Be able to understand how to brace.
Step:3 Execute a proper brace without "thinking" too much. 


Where the sequence of the steps is as important as the steps themselves. And that is precisely where the problem lies. As you've realized by now if you read or skimmed the post linked above, unfortunately, a significant percentage of the people involved in strength sports (inlcuding some at professional levels) misunderstand step#2 and consequently do a poor job at step#3 and step#4.  

AND THE KEY REASON IS THEIR LACK OF AWARENESS OF THE FOUR MAIN CORE MUSCLES DEEPER MUSCLES



1. spending time in bad positions over years makes you loose control

2. contracting just the superficial ones , you're making it harder for the brain to activate/ turn on that control.

3. loading the superficial only contracted position, you're making the problem even worse. 

 

good part:
with proper control on these, they automatically contract without needing enough effort.








<solution>

This is almost universally true for people who get into strength training or weightlifting 